.TH GAMMU-SMSD-MONITOR 1 "January 30, 2009" "Gammu 1.23.0" "Gammu Documentation"
.SH NAME
gammu\-smsd\-monitor \- Monitor state of SMS daemon for Gammu
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B gammu\-smsd\-monitor
[\fIOPTION\fR]...
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page documents briefly the
.B gammu\-smsd\-monitor
command.
.PP
\fBgammu\-smsd\-monitor\fP is a program that monitors state of Gammu SMS
daemon. It periodically displays information about phone and number of
processed messages.
.PP
Program accepts following options (please note that long options might be not
accepted on some platforms):
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
Shows help.
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
Shows version information and compiled in features.
.TP
\fB\-c\fR, \fB\-\-config\fR=\fIfile\fR
Configuration file to use, default is /etc/gammu\-smsdrc, on Windows there is
no default and configuration file path has to be always specified.
.TP
\fB\-l\fR, \fB\-\-loops\fR=\fIcount\fR
Number of loops, by default monitor loops infinitely.
.TP
\fB\-d\fR, \fB\-\-delay\fR=\fIseconds\fR
Delay betwen polling SMSD state, default is 20 seconds.
.TP
\fB\-C\fR, \fB\-\-csv\fR
Print output in comma separated values format:

client;phone ID;IMEI;sent;received;failed;battery;signal


.SH SEE ALSO
gammu\-smsdrc(5), gammu(1), gammu\-smsd(1)
.SH AUTHOR
gammu\-smsd and this manual page were written by Michal Cihar <michal@cihar.com>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2009 Michal Cihar and other authors.
License GPLv2: GNU GPL version 2 <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/old\-licenses/gpl\-2.0.html>
.br
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
.SH REPORTING BUGS
Please report bugs to <http://bugs.cihar.com>.

Before reporting a bug, please enable verbose logging in SMSD configuration:

    [gammu]
    logformat = textall

and include this verbose log within bug report.
