.TH GAMMU-SMSD-INJECT 1 "January  4, 2009" "Gammu 1.23.0" "Gammu Documentation"
.SH NAME
gammu\-smsd\-inject \- Inject messages into queue of SMS daemon for Gammu
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B gammu\-smsd\-inject
[\fIOPTION\fR]...
MESSAGETYPE RECIPIENT
[\fIMESSAGE_PARAMETER\fR]...
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page documents briefly the
.B gammu\-smsd\-inject
command.
.PP
\fBgammu\-smsd\-inject\fP is a program that enqueues message in Gammu SMS
daemon, which will be later sent by the deamon using connected GSM modem.
.PP
Support for this program depends on features available in currently used SMSD
service backend, currently only files (gammu-smsd-files(7)) does not support
this feature.
.PP
Program accepts following options (please note that long options might be not
accepted on some platforms):
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
Shows help.
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
Shows version information and compiled in features.
.TP
\fB\-c\fR, \fB\-\-config\fR=\fIfile\fR
Configuration file to use, default is /etc/gammu\-smsdrc, on Windows there is
no default and configuration file path has to be always specified.
.PP
For description of message types and their parameters, please check gammu(1).
The options are identical to ones you can use for gammu sendsms.

.SH "EXAMPLE"

.P 
To check it out, you need to have configuration file for SMSD, see
gammu-smsdrc(5) for more details about it.

.TP
Inject text message up to standard 160 chars:

.RS
.sp
.nf
.ne 7
echo "All your base are belong to us" | gammu-smsd-inject TEXT 123456
.fi
.sp
.RE
.PP

or 

.RS
.sp
.nf
.ne 7
gammu-smsd-inject TEXT 123456 \-text "All your base are belong to us"
.fi
.sp
.RE
.PP

.TP
Inject long text message:

.RS
.sp
.nf
.ne 7
echo "All your base are belong to us" | gammu-smsd-inject TEXT 123456 \-len 400
.fi
.sp
.RE
.PP

or 

.RS
.sp
.nf
.ne 7
gammu-smsd-inject TEXT 123456 \-len 400 \-text "All your base are belong to us"
.fi
.sp
.RE
.PP

or

.RS
.sp
.nf
.ne 7
gammu-smsd-inject EMS 123456 \-text "All your base are belong to us"
.fi
.sp
.RE
.PP

.TP
Inject some funky message with predefined sound and animation from 2 bitmaps:

.RS
.sp
.nf
.ne 7
gammu-smsd-inject EMS 123456 \-text "Greetings" \-defsound 1 \-text "from Gammu"
\-tone10 axelf.txt \-animation 2 file1.bmp file2.bmp
.fi
.sp
.RE
.PP

.TP
Inject protected message with ringtone:

.RS
.sp
.nf
.ne 7
gammu-smsd-inject EMS 123456 \-protected 2 \-variablebitmaplong ala.bmp
\-toneSElong axelf.txt \-toneSE ring.txt
.fi
.sp
.RE
.PP

.SH SEE ALSO
gammu\-smsdrc(5), gammu(1), gammu\-smsd(1)
.SH AUTHOR
gammu\-smsd and this manual page were written by Michal Cihar <michal@cihar.com>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2009 Michal Cihar and other authors.
License GPLv2: GNU GPL version 2 <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/old\-licenses/gpl\-2.0.html>
.br
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
.SH REPORTING BUGS
Please report bugs to <http://bugs.cihar.com>.

Before reporting a bug, please enable verbose logging in SMSD configuration:

.RS
.sp
.nf
.ne 7
[smsd]
debuglevel = 255
logfile = smsd.log
.fi
.sp
.RE
.PP

and include this verbose log within bug report.
