.TH GAMMU-SMSD-FILES 7 "January  8, 2009" "Gammu 1.23.0" "Gammu Documentation"
.SH NAME

gammu\-smsd\-files - gammu\-smsd(1) backend using filesystem as a message storage

.SH DESCRIPTION
gammu\-smsd(1) supports several backends. Actual backend is chosen in
a config file gammu\-smsdrc(5).

FILES backend stores all data on a filesystem in folders defined by
configuration (see gammu\-smsdrc(5) for description of configuration options).

.SS Receiving of messages

Received messages are stored in a folder defined by configuration. The
filename will be IN<date>_<time>_<serialno>_<phone_number>_<sequence>.<ext>,
for example NN20021130_021531_00_+45409000931640979_00.txt.

Explanation of fields:

\fB<date>\fR - date in format YYYYMMDD
.br
\fB<time>\fR - time in format HHMMSS
.br
\fB<serialno>\fR - order of a message (in case more messages were received at
same time), in format NN
.br
\fB<sequence>\fR - part of the message for multipart messages, in format NN
.br
\fB<ext>\fR - txt for text message, 8-bit messages are stored with bin
extension

The content of the file is content of the message and the format is defined by
configuration directive InboxFormat (see gammu-smsdrc(5)).

.SS Transmitting of messages

Transmitted messages are read from a folder defined by configuration. The
filename should be one of the following formats:

- OUT<phone_number>.<ext><options>
.br
- OUT<priority>_<phone_number>_<serialno>.<ext><options>
.br
- OUT<priority><date>_<time>_<serialno>_<phone_number>_<anything>.<ext><options>

Explanation of fields:

\fB<priority>\fR - an alphabetic character (A-Z) A = highest priority
.br
\fB<ext>\fR - txt for normal text SMS
.br
\fB<options>\fR - Options appended to the extension applying to text SMS:
 \fBd\fR - delivery report requested
 \fBf\fR - flash SMS
 \fBb\fR - WAP bookmark as name,URL

For example OUTG20040620_193810_123_+4512345678_xpq.txtdf is a flash text SMS
requesting delivery reports.

Other fields are same as for received messages.

SMSes will be transmitted sequentially based on the file name. The contents of
the file is the SMS to be transmitted (in Unicode or standard character set).

The contents of the file is the SMS to be transmitted (in Unicode or standard
character set), for WAP bookmarks it is split on as Name,URL, for text
messages whole file content is used. 

Please note that if file is not in Unicode, encoding is detected based on
locales, which do not have to be configured if SMSD is running from init
script. If this is your case, please add locales definition to init script.

.SH EXAMPLE

Example of the 'detail' inbox format:

.RS
.sp
.nf
.ne 7
[SMSBackup000]
#ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ
#
SMSC = "+4540590000"
SMSCUnicode = 002B0034003500340030003500390030003000300030
Sent = 20021201T025023
State = UnRead
Number = "+4522706947"
NumberUnicode = 002B0034003500320032003700300036003900340037
Name = ""
NameUnicode =
Text00 = 004100420043004400450046004700480049004A004B004C004D004E004F0050005100520053005400550056005700580059005A000A
Coding = Default
Folder = 1
Length = 27
Class = \-1
ReplySMSC = False
RejectDuplicates = True
ReplaceMessage = 0
MessageReference = 0
.fi
.sp
.RE
.PP

.SH SEE ALSO
gammu\-smsd(1), gammu\-smsdrc(5), gammu(1), gammurc(5)
.SH AUTHOR
gammu\-smsd and this manual page were written by Michal Cihar <michal@cihar.com>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2009 Michal Cihar and other authors.
License GPLv2: GNU GPL version 2 <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/old\-licenses/gpl\-2.0.html>
.br
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
.SH REPORTING BUGS
Please report bugs to <http://bugs.cihar.com>.
