.TH GAMMU-SMSD-RUN 7 "January 25, 2010" "Gammu 1.28.0" "Gammu Documentation"
.SH NAME

gammu\-smsd\-run - documentation for RunOnReceive directive

.SH DESCRIPTION

Gammu SMSD can be configured by RunOnReceive directive (see gammu\-smsdrc(5)
for details) to run defined program after receiving message. 
    
This parameter is executed through shell, so you might need to escape some
special characters and you can include any number of parameters. Additionally
parameters with identifiers of received messages are appended to the command
line. The identifiers depend on used service backend, typically it is ID of
inserted row for database backends or file name for file based backends.

Gammu SMSD waits for the script to terminate. If you make some time consuming
there, it will make SMSD not receive new messages. However to limit breakage
from this situation, the waiting time is limited to two minutes. After this
time SMSD will continue in normal operation and might execute your script
again.

.SH ENVIRONMENT

Program is executed with environment which contains lot of information about
the message. You can use it together with NULL service (see
gammu\-smsd\-null(7)) to implement completely own processing of messages.

.SS Global variables

.TP
.BI SMS_MESSAGES

Number of physical messages received.

.TP
.BI DECODED_PARTS

Number of decoded message parts.

.SS Per message variables

The variables further described as SMS_1_... are generated for each physical
message, where 1 is replaced by current number of message.

.TP
.BI SMS_1_CLASS

Class of message.

.TP
.BI SMS_1_NUMBER

Sender number.

.TP
.BI SMS_1_TEXT

Message text. Text is not available for 8-bit binary messages.

.SS Per part variables

The variables further described as DECODED_1_... are generated for each message
part, where 1 is replaced by current number of part. Set are only those
variables whose content is present in the message.

.TP
.BI DECODED_1_TEXT

Decoded long message text.

.TP
.BI DECODED_1_MMS_SENDER

Sender of MMS indication message.

.TP
.BI DECODED_1_MMS_TITLE

title of MMS indication message.

.TP
.BI DECODED_1_MMS_ADDRESS

Address (URL) of MMS from MMS indication message.

.TP
.BI DECODED_1_MMS_SIZE

Size of MMS as specified in MMS indication message.


.SH SEE ALSO
gammu\-smsd(1), gammu\-smsdrc(5), gammu(1), gammurc(5)
.SH AUTHOR
gammu\-smsd and this manual page were written by Michal Cihar <michal@cihar.com>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2010 Michal Cihar and other authors.
License GPLv2: GNU GPL version 2 <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/old\-licenses/gpl\-2.0.html>
.br
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
.SH REPORTING BUGS
Please report bugs to <http://bugs.cihar.com>.


