.TH GAMMU-SMSD-PGSQL 7 "January  8, 2009" "Gammu 1.23.0" "Gammu Documentation"
.SH NAME

.P
gammu\-smsd\-pgsql - gammu\-smsd(1) backend using PostgreSQL database server as a message storage

.SH DESCRIPTION
gammu\-smsd(1) supports several backends. Actual backend is chosen in
a config file gammu\-smsdrc(5).

PGSQL backend stores all data in a PostgreSQL database server, which
parameters are defined by configuration (see gammu\-smsdrc(5) for description of
configuration options).

More SMS daemons can share single database. If you do not specify PhoneID in
their configuration, all are treated equally and you have no guarantee which
one sends outgoing message. If you configure PhoneID and use it when inserting
message to the outbox table (gammu\-smsd\-inject(1) does this), each SMS
daemon will have separate outbox queue.

.SS Receiving of messages

Received messages are stored in inbox table.

.SS Transmitting of messages

Transmitted messages are read from table outbox and possible subsequent parts
of the same message from outbox_multipart.

.SS Description of tables

.TP
.BI daemon

Information about running daemons.

.TP
.BI gammu

Table holding single value - version of a database schema.

.TP
.BI inbox

Table where received messages will be stored.

.TP
.BI outbox

Messages enqueued for sending should be placed in this table. If message
is multipart, subsequent parts are stored in table outbox_multipart.

.TP
.BI outbox_multipart

Data for outgoing multipart messages.

.TP
.BI phones

Information about connected phones. This table is periodically refreshed and
you can get information such as battery or signal level from here.

.TP
.BI sentitems

Log of sent messages, if delivery reports are configured, message state is
updated here.

.TP
.BI pbk

Not used by SMSD currently, included only for application usage.

.TP
.BI pbk_groups

Not used by SMSD currently, included only for application usage.

.SH EXAMPLE

SQL script to create all needed tables is included in Gammu documenation. As
well as some PHP scripts interacting with the database.

.SH SEE ALSO
gammu\-smsd(1), gammu\-smsdrc(5), gammu(1), gammurc(5)
.SH AUTHOR
gammu\-smsd and this manual page were written by Michal Cihar <michal@cihar.com>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2009 Michal Cihar and other authors.
License GPLv2: GNU GPL version 2 <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/old\-licenses/gpl\-2.0.html>
.br
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
.SH REPORTING BUGS
Please report bugs to <http://bugs.cihar.com>.
