.TH GAMMURC 5 "January  4, 2009" "Gammu 1.23.0" "Gammu Documentation"
.SH NAME

.TP
.BI gammurc

gammu(1) configuration file 
.SH SYNOPSIS
.I /etc/gammurc
or 
.I ~/.gammurc
.SH DESCRIPTION
gammu(1) reads configuration from a config file. It's location is determined
on runtime. On Unix systems, it first tries ~/.gammurc and then falls back to
/etc/gammurc.

This file use ini file syntax, with comments being marked with both ; and #.
Sections of config file are identified in square brackets line [this]. All key
values are case insensitive.

Configuration file for gammu can contain several sections - [gammu], [gammu1],
[gammuN], ... Each section configures one connection setup and in default mode
gammu tries all of them in numerical order. You can also specify which
configuration section to use by giving it's number ([gammu] has number 0) as a
parameter to gammu(1) and it will then use only this section.

.TP
.BI Connection

Protocol which will be used to talk to your phone.

For Nokia cables you want to use one of following:

\fBfbus\fR           - serial FBUS connection
.br
\fBdlr3\fR           - DLR3 and compatible cables
.br
\fBdku2\fR           - DKU2 and compatible cables
.br
\fBdku5\fR           - DKU5 and compatible cables
.br
\fBmbus\fR           - serial MBUS connection

If you use some non original cable, you might need to append -nodtr (eg. for
ARK3116 based cables) or -nopower, but Gammu should be able to detect this
automatically.

For non-Nokia phones connected using cable you generally want:

\fBat\fR             - generic AT commands based connection

You can optionally specify speed of the connection, eg. at19200, but it is
not needed for modern USB cables.

For IrDA connections use one of following:

\fBirdaphonet\fR     - Phonet connection for Nokia phones.
.br
\fBirdaat\fR         - AT commands connection for most of phones (this is not supported on Linux).
.br
\fBirdaobex\fR       - OBEX (IrMC or file transfer) connection for most of phones.
.br
\fBirdagnapbus\fR    - GNapplet based connection for Symbian phones

For Bluetooth connection use one of following:

\fBbluephonet\fR     - Phonet connection for Nokia phones.
.br
\fBblueat\fR         - AT commands connection for most of phones.
.br
\fBblueobex\fR       - OBEX (IrMC or file transfer) connection for most of phones.
.br
\fBbluerfgnapbus\fR  - GNapplet based connection for Symbian phones

.TP
.BI Port

Device node or address of phone. It depends on used connection. 

For cables or emulated serial ports, you enter device name (for example
/dev/ttyS0, /dev/ttyACM0, /dev/ircomm0, /dev/rfcomm0 on Linux or COM1: on
Windows). The special exception are DKU2 and DKU5 cables, where the device is
automatically detected from driver information and this parameters is ignored.

For Bluetooth connection you have to enter Bluetooth address of your phone
(you can list Bluetooth devices in range on Linux using "hcitool scan"
command).

For IrDA connections, this parameters is not used at all.

.TP
.BI Model

Do not use this parameter unless really needed! The only use case for this is
when Gammu does not know your phone and misdetects it's features.

.TP
.BI SynchronizeTime

If you want to set time from computer to phone during starting connection. Do
not rather use this option when when to reset phone during connection (in some
phones need to set time again after restart).

.TP
.BI StartInfo 

This option allow to set, that you want (setting "yes") to see message on the
phone screen or phone should enable light for a moment during starting
connection. Phone WON'T beep during starting connection with this option.

.TP
.BI GammuCoding

Forces using specified codepage (on Windows - for example "1250" will force
CP1250) or UTF8 (in Linux - "utf8"). This should not be needed in most cases,
Gammu should detect it according to your locales.

.TP
.BI GammuLoc

Path to directory with localisation files (the directory should contain
LANG/LC_MESSAGES/gammu.mo). If gammu is properly installed it should find
these files automatically.

.TP
.BI LogFile

Path to file where information about communication will be stored.

.TP
.BI LogFormat

Determines what all will be logged to LogFile. Possible values are:

\fBnothing\fR     - no debug level
.br
\fBtext\fR        - transmission dump in text format
.br
\fBtextall\fR     - all possible info in text format
.br
\fBtextalldate\fR - all possible info in text format, with time stamp
.br
\fBerrors\fR      - errors in text format
.br
\fBerrorsdate\fR  - errors in text format, with time stamp
.br
\fBbinary\fR      - transmission dump in binary format

For debugging use either \fBtextalldate\fR or \fBtextall\fR, it contains all
needed information to diagnose problems.

.TP
.BI Features

Custom features for phone. This can be used as override when values coded in
common/gsmphones.c are bad or missing. Consult include/gammu-info.h for
possible values (all Feature values without leading F_ prefix).  Please report
correct values to Gammu authors.

.TP
.BI Use_Locking

On POSIX systems, you might want to lock serial device when it is being used.
Enabling this option (setting to yes) will make Gammu honor these locks and
create it on startup. On most distributions you need additional privileges to
use locking (eg. you need to be member of uucp group).

This option has no meaning on Windows.

.SH EXAMPLE

There is more complete example available in Gammu documentation.

Gammu configuration for Nokia phone using DLR3 cable:

.RS
.sp
.nf
.ne 7
[gammu]
port = /dev/ttyACM0
connection = dlr3
.fi
.sp
.RE
.PP

Gammu configuration for Sony-Ericsson phone (or any other AT compatible phone)
connected using USB cable:

.RS
.sp
.nf
.ne 7
[gammu]
port = /dev/ttyACM0
connection = at
.fi
.sp
.RE
.PP

Gammu configuration for Sony-Ericsson (or any other AT compatible phone)
connected using bluetooth:

.RS
.sp
.nf
.ne 7
[gammu]
port = B0:0B:00:00:FA:CE
connection = blueat
.fi
.sp
.RE
.PP

.SH SEE ALSO
gammu-smsd(1), gammu(1), gammurc(5)
.SH AUTHOR
gammu-smsd and this manual page were written by Michal Cihar <michal@cihar.com>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2009 Michal Cihar and other authors.
License GPLv2: GNU GPL version 2 <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/old-licenses/gpl-2.0.html>
.br
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
.SH REPORTING BUGS
Please report bugs to <http://bugs.cihar.com>.
