.TH "gnokii" "1" "July 15, 2000" "" "Gnokii"
.SH "NAME"
gnokii \- modem/fax driver for Nokia mobile phones
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.B gnokii
\fIOPTION\fR [\fIARGUMENT\fR]...
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.PP 
.B gnokii
is a Linux/Unix tool suite and (eventually) modem/fax driver for Nokia mobile phones, released under the GPL.
.PP 
.B gnokii
supports most phones from the 3810/8110 and 5110/6110 series, details including bugs specific to each series appear in the files Docs/README\-3810 and Docs/README\-6110 respectively.  

.SH "OPTIONS"
The options that are recognized by
.B gnokii
can be divided into several different groups.

.SS GENERAL
.TP 
.BR "\-\-help"
display usage information.
.TP 
.BR "\-\-version"
displays version and copyright information.
.TP 
.BR "\-\-monitor"
continually updates phone status to stderr.

.SS DIALING
.TP 
.BR "\-\-getspeeddial \fIn\fP"
reads speed dial from the specified location.
.TP 
.BR "\-\-setspeeddial \fInumber\fP \fImemory_type\fP \fIlocation\fP"
specify speed dial.
.TP 
.BR "\-\-dialvoice \fInumber\fP"
initiate voice call.
.TP 
.BR "\-\-senddtmf \fIstring\fP"
send DTMF sequence.

.SS PHONE SETTINGS
.TP 
.BR "\-\-getdisplaystatus"
shows what icons are displayed.
.TP 
.BR "\-\-displayoutput"
show texts displayed in phone's screen.
.TP 
.BR "\-\-getprofile [\fInumber\fP]"
show settings for selected(all) profile(s).
.TP 
.BR "\-\-netmonitor {\fIreset\fP|\fIoff\fP|\fIfield\fP|\fIdevel\fP|\fInext\fP|\fInr\fP}"
setting/querying netmonitor mode.
.TP 
.BR "\-\-reset [\fIsoft\fP|\fIhard\fP]"
resets the phone.

.SS CALENDAR
.TP 
.BR "\-\-getcalendarnote \fIindex\fP [\-v]"
get the note with number \fIindex\fR from calendar.
.PP 
[\-v] \- output in vCalendar 1.0 format
.TP 
.BR "\-\-writecalendarnote"
write the note to calendar.
.TP 
.BR "\-\-deletecalendarnote \fIindex\fP"
delete the note with number [\fIindex\fR] from calendar.

.SS SMS
.TP 
.BR "\-\-getsms \fImemory_type\fR \fIstart\fP [\fIend\fP] [\-f \fIfile\fP] [\-d]"
gets SMS messages from specified \fImemory type\fR starting at entry [\fIstart\fR] and ending at [\fIend\fR].
If [\fIend\fR] is not specified only one location \- [\fIstart\fR] is read.
If [\-f \fIfile\fR] is used entries are saved in \fIfile\fR.
Otherwise they are dumped to stdout.
If [\-d] switch is used, a message is deleted after reading.
.TP 
.BR "\-\-deletesms \fImemory_type\fP \fIstart\fP [\fIend\fP]"
deletes SMS messages from specified \fImemory type\fR starting at entry [\fIstart\fR] and ending at [\fIend\fR].
If [\fIend\fI] is not specified only one location \- [\fIstart\fR] is read.
.TP 
.BR "\-\-sendsms \fIdestination\fP [\-\-smsc \fImessage_center_number\fP | \-\-smscno \fImessage_center_index\fP] [\-r] [\-C \fIn\fP] [\-v \fIn\fP] [\-\-long \fIn\fP]"
sends an SMS message to \fIdestination\fR via \fImessage_center_number\fR or SMSC number taken from phone memory from address \fImessage_center_index\fR.
If this argument is ommited SMSC number is taken from phone memory from location 1.
Message text is taken from STDIN.
This function has had limited testing and may not work at all on your network.
Meaning of other optional parameters:
.PP 
[\-r] \- request for delivery report
.PP 
[\-C \fIn\fR] \- Class Message \fIn\fR, where \fIn\fR can be 0..3
.PP 
[\-v \fIn\fR] \- validity in minutes
.PP 
[\-\-long \fIn\fR] \- send no more then \fIn\fR characters, default is 160
.TP 
.BR "\-\-savesms [\-m] [\-l \fIn\fP] [\-i]"
saves SMS messages to the Outbox. Messages are read from STDIN. You can specify the following optional arguments:
.PP 
[\-m] \- mark the message as sent
[\-l \fIn\fR] \- save the message at location \fIn\fR on the SIM card
[\-i] \- ask before overwriting specified location
.TP 
.BR "\-\-getsmsc \fInumber\fP"
show the SMSC number from location \fInumber\fR.

.SS LOGOS
.TP 
.BR "\-\-sendlogo {\fIcaller\fP|\fIop\fP} \fIdestination\fP \fIlogofile\fP [\fInetwork_code\fP]"
send the \fIlogofile\fR to \fIdestination\fR as operator or CLI logo.
.TP 
.BR "\-\-setlogo \fIlogofile\fP [\fInetwork_code\fP]"
.TP 
.BR "\-\-setlogo \fIlogofile\fP [\fIcaller_group_number\fP] [\fIgroup_name\fP]"
.TP 
.BR "\-\-setlogo \fItext\fP [\fIstartup_text\fP]"
.TP 
.BR "\-\-setlogo \fIdealer\fP [\fIdealer_startup_text\fP]"
set caller, startup or operator logo.
.TP 
.BR "\-\-getlogo \fIlogofile\fP {\fIcaller\fP|\fIop\fP|\fIstartup\fP} [\fIcaller_group_number\fP]"
get caller, startup or operator logo.

.SS RINGTONES
.TP 
.BR "\-\-sendringtone \fIdestination\fI \fIrtttlfile\fP"
send the \fIrtttlfile\fR to \fIdestination\fR as ringtone.
.TP 
.BR "\-\-setringtone \fIrtttlfile\fP"
set the \fIrtttlfile\fR as ringtone (on 6110).

.SS PHONEBOOK
.TP 
.BR "\-\-getmemory \fImemory_type\fP \fIstart\fP [\fIend\fP]"
reads specificed memory location from phone.
If [\fIend\fR] is not specified only one location \- [\fIstart\fR] is read.
Valid \fImemory types\fR are: ME, SM, FD, ON, EN, DC, RC, MC, LD.
.TP 
.BR "\-\-writephonebook [\-i]"
reads data from stdin and writes to phonebook
When \-i option is used, refuses to overwrite existing entries.
Uses the same format as provided by the output of the getphonebook command.

.SS DATE, TIME AND ALARM
.TP 
.BR "\-\-setdatetime [\fIYYY\fP [\fIMM\fP [\fIDD\fP [\fIHH\fP [\fIMM\fP]]]]]"
set the date and the time of the phone.
.TP 
.BR "\-\-getdatetime"
shows current date and time in the phone.
.TP 
.BR "\-\-setalarm \fIHH\fP \fIMM\fP"
set the alarm of the phone.
.TP 
.BR "\-\-getalarm"
shows current alarm.

.SS SECURITY
.TP 
.BR "\-\-identify"
get IMEI, model and revision.
.TP 
.BR "\-\-entersecuritycode {\fIPIN\fP|\fIPIN2\fP|\fIPUK\fP|\fIPUK2\fP}"
asks for the code and sends it to the phone.
.TP 
.BR "\-\-getsecuritycodestatus"
show if a security code is needed.

.SH "DIAGNOSTICS"
Various error messages are printed to standard error.  The exit code
is 0 for correct functioning.  Errors which appear to be caused by
invalid or abused command line parameters cause an exit code of 2, and
other errors cause an exit code of 1.

.SH "BUGS"
.PP 
We write quality software here ;)

.SH "AUTHOR"
Hugh Blemings <hugh@blemings.org> and Pavel Janik ml. <Pavel.Janik@suse.cz>

Manual page written by Dag Wieers <dag@mind.be> and Pawel Kot <pkot@linuxnews.pl>

See also Docs/CREDITS from Gnokii sources.

.SH "COPYING"
This program is distributed under the GNU Public License.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
gnokiid, xgnokii, xlogos
