.TH "gnokiid" "8" "May 27, 2001" "" "Gnokii"
.SH "NAME"
gnokiid \- create a virtual modem for Nokia portable phones
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.B gnokiid

.B gnokiid
[\fB\-\-help\fR|\fB\-\-version\fR|\fB\-\-debug\fR]

.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.PP 
.B gnokiid
is a tool from the Gnokii tool suite used to create a virtual modem device with a Nokia portable telephone.  The virtual modem device is usually accessed via a symbolic link called /dev/gnokii (created automatically by \fBmgnokiidev\fR(8)).

.PP 
After 
.B gnokiid
has created the virtual modem, it can be accessed like any other Hayes\-compatible modem by such programs as the terminal program \fBminicom\fR(1) or the PPP daemon \fBpppd\fR(8) to make standard data connections to remote computers.

.PP 
The full range of portable telephone functions (SMS messaging, phone book, operator logos, etc.) are accessed using the command\-line program \fBgnokii\fR(1) or the graphical interface program \fBxgnokii\fR(1x).


.PP 
Gnokii
is a Linux/Unix tool suite and (eventually) modem/fax driver for Nokia mobile phones, released under the GPL.
.PP 
Gnokii
supports most phones from the 3810/8110 and 5110/6110 series, details including bugs specific to each series appear in the files Docs/README\-3810 and Docs/README\-6110 respectively.  

.SH "OPTIONS"
.PP 
If called without any options, \fBgnokiid\fR will set up a virtual modem device using the settings in /etc/gnokiirc or in the user's ~/.gnokiirc (if it exists).  Otherwise,

.TP 
\fB\-\-help\fR
print out a short usage message
.TP 
\fB\-\-version\fR
print out version, copyright, phone, and serial device info
.TP 
\fB\-\-debug\fR
uses STDIN/STDOUT for a virtual modem
.SH "DIAGNOSTICS"
Various error messages are printed to STDERR.
.SH "BUGS"
.PP 
Hmmm...


.SH "AUTHOR"
Hugh Blemings <hugh@blemings.org> and Pavel Janik ml. <Pavel.Janik@suse.cz> are the authors of the
Gnokii
tool suite.

This manual page was written by Erik Rossen <rossen@freesurf.ch>.

See also Docs/CREDITS from the Gnokii sources.
.SH "COPYING"
This program is distributed under the GNU Public License.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
gnokii, xgnokii, mgnokiidev
